A Guessing Game: Mixtilinear Incircles
EVAN CHEN《陳誼廷》
11 August 2015

Sometimes figuring out what to prove is harder than actually proving it!
An important skill for olympiad geometers is to be able to guess when three points
are collinear, four points are concyclic, three lines are concurrent, and so on. Difficult
geometry problems (on the level of IMO 3/6) often amount to finding two or three critical
claims; each of these claims may be no harder to prove than an IMO 1/4, but making
the right guesses of what to prove can turn out to the core difficulty of the problem. For
a fantastic example, see my solution to IMO 2011/6.
In this exercise, I’ll put write down a configuration of several points, lines, and circles.
Your job is to find as many “coincidences” as you can: nontrivial collinearities, equal
angles, cyclic quadrilaterals, and so on and so forth. Then, see if you can prove them!

Contents
1 The Configuration

1

2 Some Hints

2

3 Answers

3

4 Sketches of Solutions

4

§1 The Configuration
Let ABC be an acute triangle with incenter I and circumcircle Γ, and let D and E
be the contact points of the incircle and A-excircle on BC. Let MA , MB , MC be
the midpoints of the arcs BC, CA, AB of Γ.
The A-mixtilinear incircle is the circle ωA which is tangent to AB, AC, Γ at
points B1 , C1 , T .
On the next page there is a bare-bones diagram with all these points, as well as some
hints to get you started. However, before using it, I encourage you to try and find
as many things as you can using your own ruler and compass. On an olympiad,
you do not have the luxury of referring to a perfect, computer-drawn diagram! You can
(and should) use more than one hand-drawn diagram.

1

Evan Chen《陳誼廷》 — 11 August 2015

A Guessing Game: Mixtilinear Incircles

§2 Some Hints
Now that you’ve taken a look with the hand-drawn diagram, see if you can spot even
more things in the following accurate computer-generated figure.

MB
A

C1

MC
I
B1
B

D

E

C

T

MA

Here are some possible hints for things you could look for:
• There are at least three nontrivial collinearities among the labelled points.
• There are at least two nontrivial cyclic quadrilaterals among the labelled points.
• There are several nontrivial pairs of equal angles among the labelled points.
• There is at least one set of concurrent lines (which meet outside the triangle).
• Look at the “top” of the circumcircle.
• There are at least two lines tangent to some circumcircles.
My list of properties has ten items. When you want to see my answers, turn the page.

2

Evan Chen《陳誼廷》 — 11 August 2015

A Guessing Game: Mixtilinear Incircles

§3 Answers
MB
A

C1

MC
I
B1
B

D

E

C

T

MA

1. Points T , B1 , MC are collinear. Similarly, points T , C1 , MB are collinear.
2. Point I is the midpoint of B1 C1 .
3. Ray T I passes through the “topmost” points of both ωA and Γ (the point opposite
MA on Γ). In particular, AE and T I meet on ωA .
4. ∠BAT = ∠CAE, and equivalent angles.
5. ∠AT B = ∠CT D, and equivalent angles.
6. ∠AT MC = ∠MB T I (not shown in figure).
7. Quadrilaterals BB1 IT and CC1 IT are cyclic.
8. Lines BI and CI are tangents to the previously mentioned quadrilaterals.
9. The intersection of lines AI and BC lies on the circumcircle of 4DT MA .
10. Lines BC, T MA , B1 C1 are concurrent.
11. Lines T MA and AD meet on the mixtilinear incircle. (Thanks to my student H.W.
for finding this one!)
This list is by no means exhaustive — there are more properties buried in here that I
haven’t mentioned.
3

Evan Chen《陳誼廷》 — 11 August 2015

A Guessing Game: Mixtilinear Incircles

§4 Sketches of Solutions
1. Consider the homothety at T sending ωA to Γ.
2. You can use Pascal’s Theorem on Γ. (The special case when AB = AC was IMO
1978).
3. In 4T B1 C1 , T A is a symmedian and T I is a median. (This was given as a problem
on Iran 2002.)
4. Inversion at A. (This was EGMO 2013, Problem 2.)
5. Reflect T across the perpendicular bisector of BC.
6. This just follows by symmedians.
7. Angle chasing (using above properties).
8. Angle chasing (using above properties).
9. Some more angle chasing, using ∠AT B = ∠CT D.
10. Use Pascal on Γ once again.
11. Two homotheties.
For more detailed discussion, you might consult http://blog.evanchen.cc/2015/08/11/
the-mixtilinear-incircle.
Want to try this again? See what coincidences you can find if you draw in all three
mixtilinear incircles. For example, what are their radical axii? Can you find some
concurrent cevians?

4

